---
title: Great ape culture
author: Yoram Heil
session: A
number: 1
published: true
layout: abstract
edition: 2019
---

According to the University of Minnesota (2019) culture is defined as; “the shared patterns of behaviors and interactions, cognitive constructs, and affective understanding that are learned through a process of socialization. These shared patterns identify the members of a culture group while also distinguishing those of another group.” 

Culture is commonly taught to be something uniquely human even though recent primate studies have led to the realization that some of the population differences observed in some great ape species possess close similarities to human cultures (Boesch, 2012; Mcgrew, Reynolds, Sugiyama, &amp; Boesch, 1999; Whiten, 2011; van Schaik, et al., 2003). For example, in chimpanzees they found a correlation between geographic distance and cultural difference. Furthermore, there is no effect of habitat type on the content of these cultures. (van Schaik, et al., 2003) The collection of such detailed observations from wild animal populations has provided convincing evidence about the cultural skills in different animal populations, which has resulted in a new research direction away from the question, “do animals possess culture?" to the question, "what differentiates humans' cultural abilities from other animals'?" (Boesch, 2012). Although we now possess a vast archive of relevant chimpanzee (and human) observation and experiments, the conclusions about cultural ancestry that should properly be drawn from these remain contentious (Whiten, The scope of culture in chimpanzees, humans and ancestral apes, 2011). We can state that the combined repertoire of these behaviour patterns is itself highly distinctive, a phenomenon characteristic of human cultures, which was previously unrecognised in non-human species (Mcgrew, Reynolds, Sugiyama, &amp; Boesch, 1999). One example for this is when an adolescent’s chimpanzee migrates to another community it has been seen to bring cultural variants with, from which the new residents can learn. This also works the other way around with immigrants being exposed to new variants and then can learn from them. (Whiten, The scope of culture in chimpanzees, humans and ancestral apes, 2011) For further research it would be interesting to get a precise understanding of social-transmission mechanisms that is in place for cultural transmission. We know that cultural transmission in humans in mostly done with speech which is uniquely to our species. This can be done either face to face or describing the behaviour without even showing it. (Boesch, 2012) Furthermore, Humans tend to overimitate which results in adopting irrelevant and maladaptive cultural traits (Boesch, 2012; Whiten, McGuigan, Marshall-Pescini, &amp; Hopper, 2009). Here we can see a difference in chimpanzees who rather simulate a behaviour instead of just copying what results in less spreading of nonadaptive or opaque cultural traits (Whiten, McGuigan, Marshall-Pescini, &amp; Hopper, 2009). It is argued that for cultural transmission exact copying is required and that this only can be achieved by true imitation or teaching. The emulation of a behaviour brings over the context, but with much less exactness thus missing the cultural part. Although it is never stated that cultural transmission required either of these mechanisms and that there are other ways of social learning of equal value to cultural transmission. (Boesch, 2012) These findings suggest that culture was already present in primates before the emergence of language and music. Therefore, it could be interesting to study culture in other primate species in greater detail than has been done before. If we can find more concrete evidence of the presence of culture further down the human lineage tree, we might be able to pinpoint the exact moment culture emerged


<div class="references">

References
---------

- Boesch, C. (2012). From Material to Symbolic Cultures: Cultures in Primates. *The Oxford Handbook of Culture and Psychology*, 677-692.
- Lyons, D. E., Young, A. G., &amp; Keil, F. (2007, December 4). *The hidden structure of overimitation.* Retrieved from NCBI: [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2148370/]()
- Mcgrew, W. C., Reynolds, V., Sugiyama, Y., &amp; Boesch, C. (1999). *Cultures in Chimpanzees.* Nature.
- University of Minnesota. (2019). *What is Culture?* Retrieved from CARLA: [http://carla.umn.edu/culture/definitions.html]()
- van Schaik, C. P., Ancrenaz, M., Borgen, G., Galdikas, B., Knott, C. D., Singleton, I., . . . Merril, M. (2003, Januari 3). *Orangutan Cultures and the Evolution of Material Culture.* Retrieved from Science: [https://science.sciencemag.org/content/299/5603/102]()
- Whiten, A. (2011, April 12). *The scope of culture in chimpanzees, humans and ancestral apes.* Retrieved from THE ROYAL SOCIETY: [https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2010.0334]()
- Whiten, A., McGuigan, N., Marshall-Pescini, S., &amp; Hopper, L. M. (2009, Augustus 27). *Emulation, imitation, over-imitation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee.* Retrieved from NCBI: [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2865074/]()

</div>