---
title: The Universality of Musical Function
author: Fred Rosa
session: C
number: 1
published: true
layout: abstract
edition: 2019
---

Humans use music for a variety of functions.  There are plenty of studies documenting the cross-cultural functions of music, and these will be investigated in this research. Merriam (1964) identified 10 universal functions of music, subdivided into individual, social, and cultural reasons. Mehr et. al (2018) found the existence of universal associations in the function of music, with a sample size of 750 subjects from 60 different countries. Schaefer et al. (2008) also found similarities in the functions of music listening between collectivist and individualistic societies; India and Germany respectively. However, according to Rasmussen (2018) it is a common view in ethnomusicology that despite the universality of music, its meanings cannot be understood outside of the context in which it was birthed. There seems then to be a stark divergence between the implications of studying musical function through either ethnography or empirical psychology.

Main Points
---

There is sufficient evidence to conclude at least seven universal functions of music – music in the background, to evoke memories, for diversion, expression of emotion, self-regulating, reflecting one’s identity, and social bonding (Boer & Fischer, 2011). Nevertheless, according to Schaefer et al. (2008), there are differences in the tendencies for each function across cultures. However, the nature of these studies is that they lack a comprehension of the anthropological context from which the music ensued. Another point of criticism is that these studies are conducted through the lens of Western empirical psychology, while ethnomusicologists tend to engage in participant observation with the intention of grasping at the implied cultural and social packages which are inseparable from the music itself. According to Lewis (2013), the concepts associated with the Western idea of music and dance are not shared across cultures, and there are multiple societies in which there are no distinct terms for music and dance, but instead specific terms for certain performances that involve music and dance. Consequently, it may be unreasonable to study the cross-cultural functions of music through what we refer to as “music”, as it is not in the same classification category across cultures (Gourlay, 1984). To conclude, there is plenty of evidence that suggests universal functions of music across the globe, but these results are limited, and their validity is disputable due to their inability to account for differences in the cross-cultural classifications of music.

Significance
----

The purpose of this study is to further understand the universality in the functions of music across cultures. However, the Western lens and perception of music differs greatly from that of other cultures, and this difference is too often ignored in the literature. It remains crucial to remember that whilst there is plenty of evidence regarding the universality of musical function, it may be completely inappropriate to make such a claim given than many societies would not consider their activities to be music.

Future Work
---

Study the greater artistic scope of which music is a mere component of in different cultures, and form a framework that is more inclusive of other definitions of music. This will allow for a greater understanding of the human propensity for musical expression as well as the tendency to regard music as identical to dance & other forms of expression.

<div class="references">

References
---

- Boer, D., Fischer, R., Hernandez, J.D., Atilano, M.L., Moreno, L., Roth, M., & Zenger, M. (2011). The Functions of Music-Listening across Cultures: The Development of a Scale Measuring Personal, Social and Cultural Functions of Music.
- Boer, Diana. (2010). Music Makes the People Come Together: Social Functions of Music Listening for Young People Across Cultures.
- Boer, D., & Fischer, R. (2011). The functions of music-listening across cultures: The development of a scale measuring personal, social and cultural functions of music. In F. Deutsch, M. Boehnke, U. Kühnen, & K. Boehnke (Eds*Rendering borders obsolete: Cross-cultural and cultural psychology as an interdisciplinary, multi-method endeavor: Proceedings from the 19th International Congress of the International Association for Cross-Cultural* *Psychology*. <a href="https://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/iaccp_papers/70/">https://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/iaccp_papers/70/</a>
- Gourlay, K. (1984). The Non-Universality of Music and the Universality of Non-Music. *The World of Music,* *26*(2), 25-39. Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/43560982
- Lewis, J. (2013). A Cross-Cultural Perspective on the Significance of Music and Dance to Culture and Society. *Language, Music, and the Brain*, 45-66. doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262018104.003.0002
- Mehr, S. A., Singh, M., York, H., Glowacki, L., & Krasnow, M. M. (2018). Form and Function in Human Song. *Current biology : CB*, *28*(3), 356–368.e5. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.12.042
- Merriam, A. P. (1977). Definitions of "Comparative Musicology" and "Ethnomusicology": An Historical-Theoretical Perspective. *Ethnomusicology*, *21*(2), 189. doi:10.2307/850943
- Saarikallio, S. (2012). Development and Validation of the Brief Music in Mood Regulation Scale (B-MMR). *Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal*, *30*(1), 97-105. doi:10.1525/mp.2012.30.1.97
- Schäfer, T., Tipandjan, A., & Sedlmeier, P. (2012). The functions of music and their relationship to music preference in India and Germany. *International Journal of Psychology*, *47*(5), 370-380. doi:10.1080/00207594.2012.688133
</div>