---
title: Humans have innate abilities to create a new language
author: Mathilde de Smit
session: C
number: 4
published: true
layout: abstract
edition: 2019
---

In deaf communities new sign languages have been created, this provides a research window into the fundamental nature of human language and the inception of universal hallmarks of language. Another point of focus for language research, is infant research, in which language acquisition in infants is investigated. This type of research could provide fundamental knowledge about innate linguistic competences, as infants are not heavily exposed to speech yet.

Main point
----

The main point of my research project is as follows: humans possess certain cognitive constraints that make humans capable of creating a new language and giving it its fundamental structure. This main point is based on the results of the following studies.

First of all, a new sign language that has been created by deaf Nicaraguans over the past 25 years was studied by Senghas et al. (2004). In this research it was found that this sign language possessed the most important properties of language: discreteness and combinatorial patterning. The results also showed that younger and more recent learners of the sign language produced the language in its expanded, most developed form.

Secondly, in another deaf community, which was an isolated endogamous community, Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language (ABSL) was created. This sign language was studied by Sander et al. (2005) and according to this research the emerging grammatical structures should be regarded as an independent development within the language, as ABSL differs from those found both in the ambient spoken languages in the community and in the other sign language found predominantly in the surrounding area.

These studies thus suggest that humans have innate linguistic competences, that make us capable of creating a language. However, we have to be cautious when regarding these findings, as there may be an effect of cultural evolution. After all, these sign languages were created in communities and thus in social groups. Therefore, it is interesting to also look at results from infant studies, because this could give us some insights into the linguistic abilities that humans have, while these are not intensely shaped yet by cultural influences.

In the study by Marcus et al. (1999) the rule learning of a basic ‘grammar’ by seven-month-old infants was investigated. This was measured by using the Head-Turn-Paradigm, which is a paradigm that measures looking time as an indication for their interest and attention to a certain stimulus, and this signals their ability to discriminate the types of stimuli from each other. Based on the results the authors of this study concluded that infants have the ability to extract algebra-like rules quickly and that they are also able to generalize these rules to novel stimuli.

So, this suggests that humans have some innate tool for understanding grammar. However, the study by Marcus et al. (1999) is a behavioral research, and brain-imaging studies are also important to include when considering possible innate linguistic abilities. The review study of Dehaene-Lambertz et al. (2006) describes multiple results of neuro-imaging studies of infants’ linguistic competences. Without going into detail about the specific brain regions, the results showed that the speech processing capacities that infants possess, rely mostly on brain circuits similar to those observed in adults.

This study thus shows that human brains before intense exposure to speech have a lot in common with the brains of mature and linguistically competent human adults. This again supports the main point, namely that humans possess certain innate cognitive constraints for language.

Significance
---

The significance of this topic is that it provides substantiation for the idea that there have been evolutionary pressures on language that have led to cognitive language constraints in humans.  

Future work
---

Future work could investigate if new languages can only be formed in social groups or if this is also possible to do on your own. In the described studies the sign languages were formed in communities, and this could lead to influences of cultural aspects. Therefore, it would be very interesting to see if one human being has the ability to create a new language on its own. However, this would be very hard to investigate and maybe even impossible, as language is a product of social behavior.

<div class="references">

References
----

- Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Hertz-Pannier, L., & Dubois, J. (2006). Nature and nurture in language acquisition: anatomical and functional brain-imaging studies in infants. Trends in neurosciences, 29(7), 367-373.
- Marcus, G., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & P. Vishton (1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants. Science 283(5398), 77-80.
- Sandler, W, Meir, I, Padden, C, & Aronoff, M. (2005). The emergence of grammar: Systematic structure in a new lan- guage. PNAS, 5. doi:10/bbpkzw
- Senghas, A. (2004). Children Creating Core Properties of Language: Evidence from an Emerging Sign Language in Nicaragua. Science, 305(5691), 1779–1782. doi:10 . 1126 / science.1100199
</div>