---
title: Call me maybe?
subtitle: Does animal communication lack flexibility?
author: Katharina Pütz
session: A
number: 5
published: true
layout: abstract
edition: 2019
---

Alarm calls are a prominent example for communication in the animal world. A new paper from Wegdell, Hammerschmidt and Fischer (2019) shows impressively how alarm call structures are conserved in species that are closely related like African green monkeys and vervet monkeys. The findings support the view of a dichotomy in flexibility when it comes to vocal production in comparison to vocal learning. 

African green monkeys can attach a meaning to a novel sound of a drone and learn quickly to react to it with an alarm call, even though they are not used to aerial predators. Most interestingly the new alarm calls are very similar to the aerial alarm calls of the closely related vervet monkeys. Vocal production in nonhuman primates is however very limited which is shown by the fact that the spectrogram of both aerial calls show similar properties in the related species. Vocal production is however considered as a key concept of symbolic communication. Those findings thus suggest that innateness plays a bigger role in animal communication and is less flexible than expected. In order to understand the differences of human and primate communication I am going to look at the concepts of intentional signaling and the mental representation that is necessary in order to understand an alarm call and react according to the information that is transmitted (see Fischer, 2017; Fitch, 2020). I will look at the findings and suggestions of this paper in the light of a mentalist perspective on animal communication. (see Fitch, 2020) The focus here lies on the question in which way a mental representation might possible takes place in the mind of an animal. Further I will argue that vocal utterances should not be the only parts of animal communication that need to be taken into consideration when talking about animal communication. (Fitch, 2020) To stress this point I will elaborate on known examples of animals transmitting information to other individuals without using vocalization. The waggle dance of bees is a known system informing other individuals of foods sources and give specific information about location and type of food source. (Fitch, 2020) This shows that the mere findings of hard-wired alarm calls might explain how communication systems can be transmitted over generations but is not enough in order to dismiss animal communication as a phenomenon that differs completely from human communication. We should thus not forget about the underlying abilities like intentionality and mental representation that are essential in order to communicate successfully that still seem to be present in animals.

<div class="references">

References
---

- Fischer, J. (2017). Primate vocal production and the riddle of language evolution. *Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 24*(1), 72–78. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-016-1076-8
- Fischer, J., & Hammerschmidt, K. (2020). Towards a new taxonomy of primate vocal production learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. *Series B, Biological Sciences, 375*(1789), 20190045. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0045
- Fischer, J., & Price, T. (2017). Meaning, intention, and inference in primate vocal communication. *Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 82*, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.10.014
- Fitch, W. T. (2015). Evolving pragmatics. *Current Biology, 25*(23), R1110–R1112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.10.013
- Fitch, W. T. (2020). Animal cognition and the evolution of human language: why we cannot focus solely on communication. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. *Series B, Biological Sciences, 375*(1789), 20190046. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0046
- Price, T., & Fischer, J. (2014). Meaning attribution in the West African green monkey: Influence of call type and context. *Animal Cognition, 17*(2), 277–286. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10071-013-0660-9
- Wegdell, F., Hammerschmidt, K., & Fischer, J. (2019). Conserved alarm calls but rapid auditory learning in monkey responses to novel flying objects. *Nature Ecology and Evolution, 3*(7), 1039–1042. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-019-0903-5
</div>